welcome to background briefing I'm Ian
masters today we'll deal with one
subject and that is the recently
conducted hearings before the Senate
Select Intelligence Committee chaired by
Senator Arlen Specter co-chaired by Bob
Kerry
the leadoff witness - in that hearing
which was prompted by the series of
articles in the San Jose Mercury News
alleging contra cocaine connection into
South Central Los Angeles involving the
Central Intelligence Agency was Jack
Blum and we're privileged to have Jack
Blum with us today Jaclyn was a special
counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee for some time I mean he was
the chief investigator for the Senate
Subcommittee on narcotics terrorism and
international operations chaired by
Senator John Kerry these hearings took
place in 1988 where you looked at the at
the the Contra drug connection and just
to begin with the Jack Blum I'm
astounded first of all in the press
coverage of the hearings you were the
leadoff witness you have followed by mr.
heights of the this the CIA's Inspector
General and then mr. Bromwich of the
Justice Department but there was no
mention of your test me which I found
fascinating in both the Los Angeles
Times and The New York Times what is it
do they think that that somehow this is
an old story I'm not really sure as to
why there was no coverage I don't know
whether it was a report or a laziness or
whether they simply felt there was
nothing new it was added but I can tell
you even where there was coverage what
came in thought happens at that hearing
dependent on what you were well it's it
is strange that that people would see
this as an old story in the sense that I
mean none of this has been resolved has
it I mean the a great deal of repertory
Alif it has been put into into analyzing
and if and debunking the San Jose
Mercury News story but absolutely no
effort has been put into looking at the
evidence that's extent and that's been
hanging since the mid eighties I
the place to begin is to talk about the
complete failure of Congress and the
administration to deal intelligently
with intelligence reform the Cold War is
over the demands on the intelligence
community a change radically the time
has really come for a serious public
review of what we mean by intelligence
and what is appropriate for the
government to be doing in a world when
we don't face the threats that people
saw before in international communism
now that that kind of review simply
hasn't occurred in fact the CIA budget
is awful the intelligence community
budget is up even as we're cutting the
budget of the State Department and other
agencies involved in foreign policy and
I think we should be doing for a review
of the entire history of intelligence
operations and how they connected with
both drug trafficking and organized in
the sense that they we've gone through
this tremendous geopolitical
transformation since the Cold War where
now we were 50 years we've focused on
national security and a national defense
and we suddenly in a world in which
there are no nation-states effectively
threatening each other but the threats
come from sub-national disintegration of
borders and cultures and religious
differences and the transnational
phenomenon which we'd like to I'd like
to talk about today which is drugs and
crime and that is clearly on the rise
and indeed many country the former
country of the Soviet Union now Russia
is a country completely beset by
sub-national and transnational security
threats well the interesting thing is
but drugs have shown up in one civil war
after another at one major security
problem area after another so if you
look at Bosnia the problems at Bosnia
many people may not understand that
other things the Bosnian war was
financed by drug-dealing people in
Europe no performer Yugoslavia became a
center for drug trafficking as his war
went on because people had the
opportunity in the war zone to to
smuggle and deal in narcotics coming out
of South Asia well you know back to to
Beirut which was destroyed in a credible
civil war that went on for years
virtually every one of the groups in
that civil war was involved in terror
when trafficking indeed the Bekaa Valley
as is the is the jewel in the crown of
the drug trade in in Lebanon and in
Afghanistan where the war never ended
the backbone of support for that war is
heroin the people who are the refugees
and the people who continue to fight are
funding their existence and their
continued ability to fight by growing
and distributing opium poppy and then
transforming in a Tara Landon tripping
and elsewhere so there is a tremendous
correlation between the problem of
narcotics of the problem
well that would lead us then into the
the the the subject of the hearings and
here in Los Angeles Jack plum there's
been an enormous and extremely
incendiary reaction to the allegations
that came forth in the series of
articles in the San Jose Mercury News
and clearly I mean at least we can agree
on the surface that it seems to me that
in that period of the 80s we were in
order to prosecute an unpopular war that
wasn't entirely authorized by the
Congress against the Sandinistas whether
there was a direct link or not from that
period forth this country has been beset
with the scourge of cocaine and
particularly crack cocaine so damage has
been done to the United States there's
no question
about it and I think the problem in
discussing this is to separate the
issues in Los Angeles at the moment
Freeway Ricky Ross is trying to say but
his main supplier okay with CIA
connected but he was a kind of major
purveyor of crack cocaine and South
Central and therefore he and the CIA had
a very important role and even dating
Los Angeles with cocaine during that
period there are several things that are
wrong with his story and several things
wrong with making the argument that this
was some sort of plot on the part of the
government Freeway Ricky was responsible
for only a tiny tiny fraction of a
cocaine that came in to Los Angeles and
one could be reminded it was pouring in
from Mexico was coming in from a variety
of sources it was available not only in
South Central but certainly in the
entertainment areas of the city there
were stories about cocaine being sold at
the NBC commissary there were all kinds
of stories about movie stars and rock
stars who were going into various
treatment centers and not to mention the
athletes and I don't think they were all
being applied by now indeed it was a a
for a while it was a fad in Hollywood
but it had a peculiar trickle-down
effect Jack Blum it started with the
rich and famous and and the yuppies and
then they sort of Tata tired of it after
a while it seems cocaine but it does
have that natural history but to go back
to the the core of a problem if you
focus only on the freeway Ricci story
it's very easy for people to deny but
the intelligence world was responsible
for a huge problem if you on the other
hand go back to the hearings we had and
go back to the period once you very
quickly find out is that our government
systematically kept quiet about helped
and avoided confronting a variety of
people who were responsible through
responsible for flooding the entire
country with cocaine and I begin there
with general Noriega who was by his
admission by various other public
statements on the CIA payroll clearly
involved in cocaine trafficking and we
look the other way because he was
supporting us and that is all documented
in Ollie North's Diaries
you know the case of Honduras where the
generals and Honduras were involved in
the cocaine trade where we knew they
were involved and we knew that they were
protecting a major player men named
ramn matta-ballesteros and instead of
doing anything about it we actually
closed the DEA office because we needed
those Honduran chuckles and we needed
the basis of love for the Contra war for
the Contra war the Contras were in fact
in operation the in Honduras and that
same pattern was followed in Haiti it
colored the way we responded to Mexico
as the problems in Mexico surrounding
the Cabaret the murder became apparent
and it is a major piece of why the drug
cartels were able to entrench themselves
and get the kind of power and position
they did so either consciously or
unconsciously at a high policy level
during that period the conditions were
created for this Holocaust to happen yes
and why the it that's what I find so
extraordinary that the press is treating
this like an old story but you know the
Holocaust is an old story but they're
putting this till Nazi war kernels on
trial there's one in in Rome as we speak
problem has been finding a tool for
getting accountability for getting a
public discussion of what has hitherto
been secret policy and secret decisions
I think it is incredibly important in a
democracy that when decisions are taken
that have this kind of consequence
people fully understand them and debate
them and I would argue that even if you
have to make decisions in secret
ultimately when decisions are taken
the consequences have been badly thought
through or not debated but the people
who are responsible for not
understanding what the consequences of
their actions were at the very least be
dismissed and taken out of the out of
the game and if it's bad enough probably
in some way disciplined or punished the
thing that the intelligence community
has been incredibly weak at doing is
just fat which is owning up to mistakes
and cleaning the mistakes out look at
the problems they had with the older
James case and it's very tempting in a
situation like that to continue applying
rules of secrecy beyond all reason
because what those rules and secrecy do
is they protect monumental stupidity and
we've got to we've got to break through
that and I think everyone in America
should have the opportunity to
understand how the decisions were taken
and who were saying well indeed it it as
I say you know justice delayed is
justice denied and and it's
extraordinary that nobody wants to touch
this and and you tried in 19 and in your
1998 hearings were to investigate the
entire arena that we're talking about
and I understand that back then you were
thwarted at every turn yes indeed the
investigation that we ran was one that
we had to work out through what I would
call the obvious backdoor because the
government people would not give us
access to their documents or when they
did the documents were highly classified
we had to do the other thing which is go
out into the field and talk to the
people who knew what was going on and as
I sat in the hearing what is considered
a great secret in Washington is
frequently very obvious when you get out
in the field and you talk to people what
we found in the field was lots of people
understood that the war had both created
the conditions for drug trafficking and
that there were drug traffickers who
were flying the airplanes
running the supplies and doing all kinds
of other things in the Contra support
operation we had at one point testimony
from a pilot who at different times in
his career was flying drugs for himself
flying supplies for the conference
flying supplies for the humanitarian
relief organization and working as an
undercover for the Drug Enforcement
Administration and the Customs Service
and the way we came upon him was he was
a photographer at the Miami
International Airport became interested
in old junk airplanes and he saw this
one airplane dc4 that was being
repainted almost every week and he would
take photographs as one tail number
would be painted out and another one
painted on and he gave us the complete
set of photographs and it turned out
this was the one airplane and every time
it flew a mission for a different agency
or for different whatever they changed
its look and they changed its tail
number and the guy who was the pilot
figured while I'm doing all this work
for different parts of the government I
can do a little bit for myself on the
side that kind of idiocy and and I in a
sense that what if we go back to that
period and and put the context of
President Reagan being an elected
wanting to draw a line in the sand the
sense that the Sandinistas were were
surrogates of the Cubans and that the
you know there was a sort of ineffective
rebirth of the Cold War and it ended up
being the last gasp of the Cold War but
at the time there was a great deal of
the the it's fair to say that the line
in the sand was drawn right Jacqueline
yes that's what they were doing but now
let's consider what had gone on inside
the intelligence community serious
analysts at the CIA in the late 70s that
the Russian economy was in a state of
collapse and they could not ever hope to
continue the sustained level of spending
needed to keep pace of the Cold War one
those people reported to their superiors
they were told that their reports were
unacceptable and gates who was then in
charge of the intelligence analysis
brought up sight these people and
appointed a so called team D that came
back and said that the Soviet threat was
even worse than anybody had thought at
the beginning of the Reagan
administration there was actually a
general who was assigned to the White
House who was suggesting the threat was
so dire we probably ought to do a
preemptive strike and thank goodness he
was sacked because even those people
realized how a caring he wants the point
here is that there was a completely
ideologically driven analysis of reality
and in my judgment that ideologically
driven analysis of reality cost the
American taxpayers about a trillion
dollars in weaponry we probably didn't
need to build and I and would also I
would also argue but I think it's it's
correct to say that it led to a complete
wrong analysis of what the threat to the
United States was during the period
there's any rational man looked at what
was going on in America looked at the
tons of drugs coming into the city
looked at the kinds of gang warfare we
had we actually had a shootout in Miami
which is called in the history of the
drug war the Dadeland massacre where a
group of drug traffickers actually drove
a war wagon into the mall at Dade London
South Miami and the place was shot up
and this was the kind of stuff that was
happening on the streets of America my
argument runs when you have that kind of
warfare on the streets of America that's
a real security especially when the
threat is in fact coming from outside
the United States at the same time I I
would tell you what certainty but there
were no sense and East is running around
Miami and indeed since this since the
early eighties this problem has
exponentially gotten worse and as the
big enemy has gone away
the the the appearance and the reality
of the extent to which we have is a
national security problem within our own
country should become more and more
clear surely sure but another part to
this which I think is worth considering
is that many of the threats that we now
recognize and we're now turning around
to deal with are threats that come out
of the earlier blindness so in our zeal
to promote the war in Afghanistan we
turned the blind eye to the extremism
and the the extremism of a people who
are doing the training in Afghanistan
and what they were saying and what they
were doing as a consequence there are
alumni of those training camps who are
now busily planting bombs all over the
world and who become an enormous problem
for every organization Jacklyn let's
just go go back to the early eighties
and the sanest a war in the sense that
this was the genesis of this problem
that is that is be setting the inner
cities of this country and has turned
South Central Los Angeles into a war
zone and this the price we're paying is
exponentially getting greater as as the
crack babies we come have to be taken
through schools etc there's a myriad of
evidence of how heinous it all is but
the going back to the 80s initially the
Congress only appropriated I think about
nineteen million for the war against or
to support the Contras in a surrogate
war against the Sandinistas and then
then in the mid eighties that the
funding was cut off and and that's
pretty much when Oliver North comes into
the picture oh yes but you have to
understand that if you had done as I did
a kind of discussion was sandanista with
Contras on the ground that is the people
who are going into Nicaragua to fight
they would tell you but the levels of
funding and who got money from where
were largely irrelevant to their lives
because almost none of that money
actually trickled down to people who are
trying to fight the war it got siphoned
off at different levels the arms dealers
- they
own leadership which maintain houses in
multiple cities lived very very high and
I met with those people at in Miami in
1986 and again in 1989 and I'll never
forget a meeting with three contra
veterans
seriously wounded during war one of them
blind another one a lost limb and and
they're explaining to me that if we ever
have to find a revolution we don't want
to be part of anything run by your
government as we never saw any in the
money we never saw any of the support
what that war became was an enormous
business and profit opportunity so the
idea that the money was generated by
drug trafficking to support a war effort
it's wrong what happened was war and
what happened in and around it gave
everybody the excuse for having a field
day and gave them an enormous profit
opportunity and they took full advantage
of so you had traffickers who had air
strips who had access to the United
States you had government officials who
knew that nobody would confront them
with their accepting bribes what their
dealings simply because we needed them
too badly so they took at that each
other and before it was over we had
managed to have a what was a mom-and-pop
industry where small growers dealt with
small refiners who dealt with small
traffickers transformed into a major
multinational business organization
vertically integrated with tremendous
financial resources and by the time the
war was over we were now no longer
dealing with a small smuggling operation
here in a small farmer there we were
dealing with very large very
well-equipped very well-armed
organizations that had the capacity to
steal countries and of course the key to
a drug trafficking surely is to get it
across the United States border and
didn't this war in these these
conditions that were created make this a
lot easier in the south there were two
ways that it made it easier one of them
was that virtually everyone who
in the smuggling game trying to pretend
like he one way or another was part and
parcel of the resources the United
States was using in the war so virtually
every time an arrest was made in Miami
or an arrest was made of some small
airplane the guy would say hey I'm I'm
working for fill-in-the-blank and they
would be one agency or another in
support of the Contras flying supplies
to the Contras whatever the excuse was
these people were always there ready to
say they were working for the government
it became a refrain during the period
there were times when in fact
inspections were relaxed we knew that
there would be orders that came over
saying don't look at this shipment
inbound outbound or whatever it was
never clear to me that that was properly
controlled and properly supervised so
it's quite possible that some of the
shipments have weren't inspected
contained drugs well as all of us all of
us created an environment where people
were able to move move aircraft and
quantities of cocaine really we couldn't
do very much about but it but well I
think that seems to be where the San
Jose Mercury News article got slammed in
both there's a three-day series of
articles in the LA Times going through a
point-by-point and basically suggesting
he got most of it wrong and first of all
do you think that the focus are that the
CIA were dealing drugs was was the wrong
focus in as much as as the I in your
test me before that recently before
there the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence you pointed out that there
was more culpability at the level of
policy makers right I think that it is a
mistake to say that first that there was
any kind of plot to do african-americans
in South Central second I'm I'm sure
nobody on the US government payroll
actually said hey let's sell some
cocaine to these people to raise money
for something
all appropriating money for I'm certain
that that never happened I am equally
certain the people who they used has
contractors had side businesses and
among the side businesses was stealing
coking I know that they knew that those
contractors had side business Susan I
know that they said hey that's not our
problem that is the problem with law
enforcement people we're just going to
close our eyes to what they're doing
now that's substantially different than
the charge made in the San Jose Mercury
what Gary Webb has done for us is given
us the opportunity to say it's time to
do a real history of the period and a
real look back in the context of serious
consideration of where we ought to go in
intelligence reform and that discussion
has not been at well like a nobody who's
trying to really put on the table all of
the facts of all of these different
things that have gone on to say we
really have to rethink the way we go
about this business and make sure that
it doesn't happen this way in the future
well Jack Blum I think one could also
add to that call and suggest that that
since the major newspaper particularly
our local paper here the Los Angeles
Times have gone to such lengths to to
try and disprove a connection between
the CIA and and and crack cocaine in
South Central
it's as though well we've disproved that
now let's walk away and forget it what
about the Holocaust itself isn't surely
this is an opportunity for the whole
country to focus on the incredible
damage done to the fabric of this
society and to the lives of these people
in another area that is off the table
for debate in the United States but
really ought to be a very central
concern for every citizen in the country
if you are an african-american living in
the inner city your view of the United
States of America is this is a police
state which will ultimately imprison me
somewhere along the line the percentage
of young black males who go through the
criminal justice
system is absolutely shocking and what
we've done is we've created a situation
where once imprisoned those young black
males are stripped of all of their
rights for all time the right to vote
they lose the right or the ability to
collect the welfare payment under the
new legislation they lose all kinds of
rights and they will note and correctly
observe that in the prisons that they're
sent to they'll be asked to do prison
labor and from their perspective what
this is is grossly unfair because when
you have a white person for example
recent example of a star on an NBC
sitcom has a cocaine blow-up he goes off
to Betty Ford and they come up with some
fill-in episodes and they'll be right
back on the job as soon as he's dried
out change the color of the skin and the
context and the guy is going to be in
the tank and he's going to be deprived
of this right so we have a very serious
perception problem which is backed by
reality which is the focus of drug law
enforcement has been the
african-american of the minority
community and it has been
extraordinarily punitive and that has
been matched by the use of the code
words in American politics of drugs
inner city and crime as a substitute for
talking raw race now we've got to
acknowledge that and we've got a look at
it we've got to understand how it looks
to people who are in the inner city and
we've got to understand the damage it's
doing to the perception of equality of
justice in the United States and I think
that this really reaction really
underscores how seriously
different the perceptions are depending
on where one lives and the color of
one's skin and that's a very dangerous
proposition let me just remind the
audience again if I may that I'm
speaking with Jack Blum who is a special
counsel for the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee for a number of years I think
what about 15 20 years jack you know
while I I actually worked for the Senate
a total of 14 years on and off sure and
then you were the chief investigator for
the Senate Subcommittee on narcotics
terrorism and and international
operations in 1988 that was chaired by
Senator John Kerry that looked into the
activities of the Contras and the
cocaine shipping that went on there and
we're talking about this in the context
of hearings that you had about a week
and a half ago before senator Specter
and Bob Kerry the co-chairs of the
Senate Select Intelligence Committee you
gave testimony where if we're going into
that back to the idea of reform in terms
of the CIA I mean first of all how can
you reform the situation when it as far
as I can see one of the problems is if
we go back to Oliver North in the Reagan
White House one of the problems is and I
believable there was a lot of resistance
in the CIA to some of the stuff that
north and KC were up to from the
old-timers I mean isn't it true that the
CIA and other government agencies are in
for all intents and purposes toys of the
executive branch they're the ones that
get blamed for the for the misdeeds but
the orders come from the from the policy
people from the White House there's no
question about that I think it's one of
the points I tried to make in the
testimony but it's easy for people to
either say the CIA did or the CIA didn't
do it whatever they did or didn't do
somebody at the political level had a
hand in and it's at the political level
what the real real kind of judgment has
to take place but we also have to know
[Music]
the oldest single problem in politics
since the beginning of times have been
lies that have been told by people in
power to give them the freedom to do
whatever they want probably the oldest
recorded lie of the history of politics
was Pharaoh
who said I'm God we have some others you
know coming down the lines of louis xiv
who said god make me king but those lies
became the basis for getting the ruler
of a person of authority the power to do
whatever he wanted if you couple a large
lie with a whole lot of secrecy really
you do have agencies that are the toy of
the executive and it becomes a very
attractive and easy thing to do
our entire democratic government here in
the united states our constitution is
built around the proposition we don't
let people do that kind of thing I
worked for a wonderful man senator fell
apart of Michigan when he was retiring
was asked by a reporter while senator
what can you say looking back over your
career because after all many of the
things he really wanted to do you didn't
accomplish and Senator Hart looked at
impatient you really don't understand
the Constitution it was written so I
couldn't it was written so no one man
can ride in on a white horse and do what
he feels like doing this is a government
of checks and balances of supervision
and criticism and everything you do has
to be seen by other people and other
people have to sign off on it that's
what makes the country strong but Jack
if you don't know what's going on you
don't have it to have a hope that's my
point precisely I believe that if any of
these things had been discussed publicly
they never would have occurred if
anybody had said gene we have this drug
problem with a fella named Tory a there
should he be on the payroll it wouldn't
survive ten seconds now maybe you can't
say all of that quite publicly but God
if there'd been even real political
understanding of what was going on
by policymakers who maybe didn't talk to
the constituents someone would have said
wait a minute this is bloody stupid but
instead it was all swept under the rug
and even as it began to emerge what you
got out of the administration instead of
acknowledging the problem was one denial
after another and one attempt after
another to cover it up and I think that
that is where democratic institutions
really took a hit and in your
subcommittee that you are the chief
investigator for the convened in 88 and
narcotics terrorism in international
operations you really did do a lot of
work trying to find out what went on in
this period and who was culpable and I
take it that every step of the way as
you went up the chain particularly the
Justice Department you were thwarted we
had terrible problems at the Justice
Department we had problems with a State
Department the administration as a whole
simply turned off and said we really
don't want to help you do what you're
trying to do here we want to keep this
all secret and we don't want to discuss
publicly and they went beyond simply not
giving us access to where we were able
to find witnesses and have public
hearings pulling the newspapers today of
the earring to say don't believe these
witnesses they're full of it they're
liars here's what they said other times
in place and really tried to trash the
work we were doing as we were doing it
now the the strength of what they said
that they were taking at face value and
many editors deliberately played down
both the hearings and the report because
the administration had so tarnished what
we were trying to do I think the report
stands up I think work we did stands up
and time and again I've run into people
who said you people were really way
ahead of your time because many of the
things you talked about then have now
become obvious and apparent and indeed
many of what you talked about then and
investigated then have resurfaced
because of these articles in the in the
in the San Jose Mercury News but but
there's been this peculiar backlash
where the
the the watchdogs the press seem to be
really anxious to suggest that there's
some details wrong but totally unwilling
to look at the historical record which
is you've pointed out is just you know
reeks of complicity of government but
turning the blind eye of creating these
kind of conditions I mean this is isn't
isn't this when this problem started I
think that you know looking at long
historical patterns is the way you come
to understand what the trouble is in the
intelligence world ever has been and I
want to hear separate so that the
audience fully understands what I'm
talking about there are a lot of people
who work in intelligence most of those
people are information gatherers and
they're very very good they know about
their business very quietly as they
should they bring the information back
filter its justice and help the
government make decisions but there's
the other world and that's really the
world we're talking about which is the
covert operations where people say we're
going to change the way some government
is operating or we're going to change
the government and in that world there
is a kind of sub set out of a real
covert operation but we're in
preparation or with a view to the
possibility that there might be covert
operation people in the intelligence
community maintain liaison with people
who are likely to be helpful in a
difficult situation in the future so
it's that world but we're really talking
about the needs for scrutiny in the
reform but but there's a history to that
world itself isn't there that there was
there's - well let's just start with -
instance when Jim Schlesinger fied a
whole bunch of people from the
operations and then later
Stansfield Turner fide I think about
1,200 people from the operations
division this is the so-called dirty
tricks covert activities the division of
the black part of the CIA but were they
not all rehired or a lot of these people
were rehired by Bill Casey and
you mentioned many times that that at
the heart of this contour drug problem
were the contractors so these are there
were real problems with contractors and
people who were brought in and people
whom things were delegated and proxies
where we encourage certain other foreign
governments to do things that really
went far beyond the pale
so our dealings with the military people
at Argentine I think were most
extraordinary and really quite
reprehensible there are there are other
examples of it and and I think that
again is part of the issue of
supervision and reform of public
discussions and accountability there's
another point that I think is very
important for a long period of time
people mentally were separating the
problems of the inner city and the
problems of the social fabric in America
from foreign policy problems on one
level people would say hey if we're
engaged or on communism that's a foreign
policy issue and that's to be discussed
by the Guru's who know about foreign
policy by people in that establishment
that's that problem and then they come
to a different compartment called the
problems of the inner cities and that's
domestic policy and that's a whole
different cast of people turned out that
those problems were intimately connected
and the connection was completely meshed
and largely because of complacency on
the part of people have dealt with
domestic problems and the failure on
their part to recognize the connected
foreign policy people were able to sell
ideas and policies allow their work to
carry on well beyond the time when there
should have been well you know jack I've
spoken with that with the former
Secretary of State al Hague and you know
he he had a very difficult time and if
it wasn't for for Weinberger at the
Pentagon and others the Falklands War
may have been a totally different
situation and you know it's it you'd
think that anybody in the highest level
the White House would understand the
obvious that in foreign policy in
America's biggest foreign policy and
security arrangement is NATO
particularly back then when the Cold War
was on and America's biggest partner in
NATO was Britain but there was this
cabal led by Bill Casey and Jean
Kirkpatrick who are protecting the
Contras which was their secret operation
and that was that had been contracted
out to the Argentinians and the
Argentinians
thought that they had bill Casey and
Jean Kirkpatrick on their side and they
made a phenomenal mistake they they
didn't understand that in the crunch
Casey and Patrick could not carry the
day the consequences I think fortunately
catastrophic they were as bad a bunch as
we've seen in the hemisphere in a long
time that we would do business with we
would use them as a proxy
they would be the original trainers of
the Contras and that they would be
supporting a whole kind of any communist
battalion through drug trafficking is
quite a weed and this the the CIA took
them on to train the Contras in Honduras
David this same group were responsible
for the cocaine - and in the livin up
Olivia willing right I think you one has
to correct you you said the CIA not it's
the government show show and the
question is who in government and in
what policy level and these are
questions which we have yet to see the
answer to which I think the American
public is entitled to answers to and yes
it may be historical but it's absolutely
crucial to understanding help and pain
reworks so that machinery and the post
Cold War environment can be reformed but
they don't need the secrecy and the kind
of institutional arrangements we had
during the Cold War in the current
environment we need a completely
different approach to thinking about
these but but had a way I mean we
obviously at the heart of this whole
story are these characters that they
have loosely called the Cowboys the
contractors and it's in I'm just trying
to get a handle on this Jack bomb if I
mean it's as though the CIA is is saying
where there just a piano player in the
whorehouse you know they have they have
insulation who actually hires these
people well I think that you know the
logic of how it happens I think is
obvious and straightforward people are
sent to wherever they're sent and
they're told you have a job to do you
have to find people who'll do it and if
you're trying to find people to do that
kind of job you're gonna look around for
someone who's willing to do something
that's illegal
because after all flying weapons to a
covert war is not someone who's willing
to take tremendous risks for money
someone who is able to get around the
rules and regulations where they're
playing now the man you've just sent out
to do this as maybe risking his life for
his country and doing something he
thinks is patriotic assignment the guy
he's going to reach out for the help is
likely going to be someone connected
with the criminal world or the
underworld
now you cannot expect that when you're
dealing with those people you'll get
them to only do what you want them to do
any police officer who's ever run an
informant can tell you how difficult it
is to keep the informant from committing
crimes while he's working for the police
and that's a terrible problem the covert
operations confront it requires very
good management it requires very close
supervision if it should be done at all
ever in this case there was no
management no supervision and it got
totally and completely out of control
and in effect of it it didn't didn't the
the Reagan White has particularly
Colonel North particularly when they
when during the Boland Amendment period
they and and we saw the whole testimony
in the in the iran-contra hearing they
talked about having this off-the-shelf
independent the enterprise
so the
the enterprise was run and managed by a
group of people were at best incompetent
and had worst incredibly dangerous to
themselves to the American national
interest the idea that you could take
what is already a dubious proposition
which is having our government people
running it and then turn it over to a
combination of amateurs and husbands and
private contractors and expect that the
whole thing not turned totally
catastrophic but that one of the reasons
the government there was resist
I mean north north and and I came by
can't remember their names now have
Secord Hakeem I think his name was
they were boasting in front of the
United States Senate that that you know
that the professionals the CIA were just
too conservative and their what the
country really need was was this sort of
swashbuckling Buccaneers you know the
problem here is that if you have a
swashbuckling Buccaneer who has it in
his head what the idea of a national
interest is he goes off washes buckles
what you've done is you've given up on
democracy the whole idea of the way our
government works is no individual may
ever go off into the night and say I
feel like doing this I'm going to do it
everybody from the president up and down
is sworn to uphold the law after all
that's why we call it an administration
and they are subject to political checks
and balances what we had here were a
group of people who said we're not
interested in that we really don't care
about the Constitution we figured out
what the national interest is and by god
if there's nobody else with lis courage
to go out and do it our way we're going
to do it and the devil think oh well
that's just not the Constitution of the
United States and thank you I think that
they have to be brought up short we do
have a very very good form of government
and many of us have on occasions warned
to give our lives to defend and I think
it merits that kind of defense and I
think the people who went off as Cowboys
Dennis an enormous well but the Cowboys
to some extent at least one group of
them were organized by Oliver North and
in your testimony you said you made the
extraordinary point that still to this
day nobody's but and the Senate Select
Intelligence Committee still has these
original Diaries apparently nobody's
looked at the original Diaries he was
given extraordinary privilege of being
able to censor than himself well here's
here's the history of those diaries
which I think most people don't know
about Oliver North day-by-day kept
spiral-bound notebooks in which he kept
a detailed record of his meetings his
telephone conversations and what he was
doing and this is as good a
contemporaneous record of everything
into as he'll ever find when he was
fired finally fired he collected all of
these spiral bound notebook and hauled
them out of the White House with him now
those notebooks were when the
investigators became aware of their
existence were immediately classified at
the highest levels of US security
classification the so-called codeword
compartmented secret compartmented
information and yet North and his
lawyers were permitted to keep the
notebooks
moreover the lawyers cut an arrangement
with the iran-contra committee but the
only parts of the notebooks they would
turn over to the iran-contra committee
were those which were quote relevant and
the people who determined the relevance
were North's lawyers the counsel for the
iran-contra committee and some staff
looked at the originals for a brief
period and signed off on the fact that
they would only receive the parts that
had been disclosed by the lawyers the
problem was you couldn't possibly know
what you were looking at until you'd
studied it in detail it took me two days
to get used to this handwriting to the
point where I could read them coherently
so the Senate Council of
absolutely Iran conquered committee
never really understood what it was they
were getting up when they said we'll
take an edited version now when we got
into the investigation we subpoenaed
North the originals his lawyers fought
the Foreign Relations Committee tooth
and nail there were members of the
Foreign Relations Committee he said
while we shouldn't push it the
government could never answer for the
benefit of the committee why they
permitted this top-secret information
done on government time with government
money government notebooks to wind up in
private hands outside of the reach of
the Senate committee I think that North
notebook should be obtained should be
examined and should be completely
Declassified I think that it would be a
great service to the understanding of
what should never again occur in foreign
policy to have that record absolutely
open absolutely but aren't there a huge
number of references to drug trafficking
there are quite a number of references
to drug trafficking in notebooks and
there are times when the references are
most extraordinary for example of
conversations with Noriega allusions to
drug problems on the southern front and
they're tried times when there are
references or there were memoranda or
Pross notes relating to drug problems
but were cooked essentially to destroy
people who were in the way people who
North or others wanted out of the
picture because they were a threat
either they were supplying weapons at a
competitive price or they were doing
something that North didn't like so the
drug problem became a two-edged sword
somebody took advantage of it sometimes
he tarred people with it improperly but
at no time did he report it and indeed
there was hearings you know that said
congressman Hughes of the House
Judiciary Committee held in to the fact
that North leaked information
photographs of Barry seal it was an
undercover
Paulino when you say that North never
reported it remember North was working
at the National Security Council and he
did report it to the national security
advisor to the president the question
one is compelled to ask is helmut hired
he has to report it and what exactly
does it take for somebody to say the
government knew if North knew when he
told Poindexter that is as close to the
top of a pyramid at the American
government as anybody can possibly get
and I think it's disingenuous to say the
government didn't know because they in
fact were the government well then how
do you feel though in terms of a North
culpability kit I mean in in in the best
of all possible worlds it seems to me
that he was never really tried he was
given tremendous address he not only was
he allowed to skate but the people at
the very top who should have known I had
their convictions and their prosecutions
overturned you do remember that our
Secretary of Defense was pardoned by by
the President as he was about to be
indicted which is the most extraordinary
situation and that got very little
attention I think people were not
focused on how bad a mess that was and I
really blame the Democratic Party for
not making enough of an issue of it and
for not focusing it enough there was a
real reluctance on the part of people
and I don't understand why to take the
issue on and really expose the degree to
which the government had done a
constitutional had forgotten about the
procedures and methods laid out in law
and simply done what it felt like and I
think the the Weinberger problem is rust
rative of how far off the rails we go
well jack i'm just just in the last few
minutes you you in your testimony a
little over a week ago before the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence where
you recounted your efforts in 1988 and
to uncover the the activities of drug
trafficking in the Contra movement on
the Subcommittee on narcotics terrorism
and international operations you also
mentioned that just every time you would
find find out about some nefarious
character that was operating either semi
officially officially or or or just sort
of that hitching a ride in this climate
that we've talked about that was created
down there that you kept being blocked
by the crema the head of the Criminal
Division of the Justice Department
William weld who incidentally is running
in a very tight race against John Kerry
who was the chair of the the committee
that you were investigating in and we
ran into situations like there was an
Assistant United States Attorney they
reported to Senator Kerry that he had
overheard a conversation in which a US
Attorney was being instructed to in
effect kill a case because the case
might interfere with the contra
operation that assistant US attorney was
disciplined in his career was wrong
there were other situations where I was
told there were assistants who were
working on cases and the cases had been
shut down in the fact because of the
connections for the Contra war when we
tried to get those people to talk they
said they'd been told flat-out that if
they told us anything in an
on-the-record way but their careers at
the Justice Department and answer would
be ruined
it's that kind of stuff that turned up
again and again and again it was how do
we prevent Congress from finding out now
I I said to senator Specter but in fact
if you ask me the question can I say for
sure but certain kinds of covert
operations were sanctioned that the
government do the answer is no I didn't
see the government's files but on the
other hand can I say there were plenty
of people who told me what was going on
and so many and it came from so many
different directions I was pretty sure
that I
right that's a different matter and I
was prettier than I was right the
difficulty of course is that truth
becomes whatever someone arguing one
side of the case or the other would like
it to me
so the standard that was sent by the
people who were trying to cover
everything up was tell us what's in our
secret files tell us that without your
ever being allowed to have access to
them and by the way prove beyond a
shadow of a doubt that everybody who
you've talked to is telling the truth
and against that standard you really
have one very difficult time but I would
turn around and say excuse me gentlemen
why don't you just open your eyes and
look around here are the things we can
look at and know based on the absolutely
obvious drug trafficker living openly in
Tegucigalpa Honduras generals are
protecting him he's renting a home to
the US ambassador everybody knows he's
there and our government mysteriously
decides to close the DEA office in
Honduras now as far as I'm concerned I
don't have to read the secret papers I
have a pretty good idea why that office
was closed and later on we talked to the
DEA agent he said I couldn't understand
it all I knew was that the problem was
in under MERS it wasn't in Guatemala
where they sent me so I I was arguing
there were plenty of ways to see this
and it was just a matter of looking at
the obvious well Jack LEM I thank you
very much for joining us this is an
extraordinary subject and and say
justice is long delayed and still denied
and and I don't know if you're as
frustrated as I am in the sense that I I
just wish that people would go back to
the source and deal and deal with these
problems and and and and work their way
up to the problem and and deal with it
in general because as you point out in
the beginning this is the real national
security threat of the present in the
future I think that what we have to do
is get people to realize but foreign and
domestic policy increasingly or
same thing but the way we deal with
foreign policy colors the way we deal
with domestic issues but it's time to
put a lot more of this in the opening on
the table and to talk about it make it
part of our overall political debate I
think the time to the level of secrecy
we had in the Cold War period is over
the kind of operations we had in the
Cold War period is over and we need to
create a new climate in which this takes
place and that requires very major
rethinking of the way we go about our
business and to date I haven't seen it
I'd very much like to see it and I'd
like to see the debate rolling it
shouldn't be my voice alone there are
plenty of people of other ideas people
who disagree with me I think the debate
would be very very healthy I thank you
for joining us in Los Angeles Jack plum
thank you bye-bye and hello again I'm
Ian masters I was just speaking then
with Jack Blum who for 14 years was the
special counsel to the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee and he was the chief
investigator for the Senate Subcommittee
on narcotics terrorism and international
operations in 1988 and we're talking
about his recent testimony before the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
about a week and a half ago where he
testified and laid out a broader canvas
these hearings of course were held in
response to the articles by a Gary Webb
in the San Jose Mercury News which have
been largely panned in by the mainstream
press but as I say Jack Blum's
experienced a scope and understanding of
the genesis and of the problem and the
broader canvas remains undiscussed and
the broader issues that he talked about
have yet to be debated I think Madeleine
Schwab for the board operating this
program is heard live every Sunday at
11:00 and rebroadcast on Monday at 2:00
p.m. I'll be back again next Sunday at
11:00 have a very pleasant week bye